here's Einstein predicting gravitational
waves laying the foundation for a laser
and 100 years later his gravitational
waves are found with lasers yes Einstein
was kind of
smart from the time I first started
working on gravitational waves until we
succeeded it was 50 years some things
take a long time we do build on each
other and none of them by themselves are
smart enough this Nobel Prize really
belongs to a thousand people if I can
see farther than others is cuz I've
stood on the shoulders of giants whove
come before me and that's the nature of
science it's very promising uh but it's
going to continue on into the Next
Generation before the ultimate success
is had very very very
probably this is star talk I'm your host
Neil degrass Tyson your personal
astrophysicist and today we're featuring
one of our one-on-one con ation this
time with professor of theoretical
physics Kip Thorne Kip Thorne welcome to
start talk a pleasure to be with you
Neil oh my gosh we are uh coming from
your home office in pasaden California a
wonderful office my son designed this
part of the house and built it and my
brother designed and build all the
furniture these are really useful people
to have in the family it's a wonderful
family
they're the Practical ones I've actually
known you for some time not that we were
beer drinking buddies but I think we've
drunk beers together in the Canary
Islands yes we did okay okay I I stand
corrected uh but my first exposure to
you was you were one of the three
authors of this book called gravitation
and we used to joke of course it was the
only book where you learned about it
just by carrying it
around and I think we probably wrote it
before you were born possibly possibly
uh although I'm older than you might
think uh this book is a graduate level
treaties on basically Einstein's general
theory of relativity at the time I
acquired the paperback of it which this
is it's tough making a paperback this
thick but this has the exact proportions
of what was then the Manhattan yellow
pages so we we we used to call it the
phone book yes uh just affectionately
may I may I add it was brilliantly
conceived because I don't know if you
can notice on camera there are uh Tabs
are different colors say white and black
and they represent two different paths
through the book one is sort of the
elementary path and one the more
advanced path except it all looked
Advanced to me at the time so whose idea
was this to come up with this book
coming up with the book I think it was
sort of grew out of discussions that uh
Charlie misner John Wheeler my PhD
adviser and I had a few years after
those are the three co-authors three
co-authors and uh so it it sort of grew
organically in the uh that's the best
kind of yes projects to have 1960s and
early 1970s MH yes I was born before the
60s oh
really so
uh on here is uh Charlie misner who's at
was at the University of Maryland yes
and so my copy of this I had you sign it
and then I spent a year teaching at the
University of Maryland so I quickly went
over to his office and had him sign it
but before then I uh I started out in
graduate school at the University of
Texas where John Aral wheeler had they
stole him from Princeton I think is what
that or or him from Princeton I think
yeah that's an accurate
statement and so I had all three of them
sign it in fact John Wheeler's course
that he taught in general relativity is
where I met my wife wow yeah she has a
PHD in mathematical physics so we met in
relativity class just thought I'd say
that very romantic place to meet you
know very romantic very romantic and
John Wheeler used to give out uh a penny
if you caught an error that he committed
on the front board so I have one of his
pennies I I don't remember it was not a
big thing it was like it was a typo or
something what the WR the written
version of a typo but um so uh anyhow
it's just Delight to uh meet again with
you and what prompted this was
our uh you know you have a lot of
accolades of course including the Nobel
Prize okay but but more importantly than
that you were science adviser on the
film
Interstellar I was more than science
adviser yes you were you you were
executive producer I was more than
executive producer it it grew out of a
treatment that Linda opst an
ex-girlfriend of mine oh and I Lind big
producer of sci-fi films yeah she a big
producer of films of a wide variety but
Linda and I dated in 1979 80 and uh she
was uh too high strung for me and I was
too nerdy for her but we became close
friends wow and who knows that why
didn't I know this why did no stop why
didn't where would one learn this it we
need a gossip a physicist gossip column
is that right yeah it was some years
later after Carl Sean who uh set us up
on a blind date by the way that's we met
okay some years
later Linda called me up and said would
you like to brainstorm with me for a
movie wow and uh we did and that's how
Interstellar was born so was that at the
time it really was was the creation of
the Nolan brothers because they took
what we had given them uh which was
basically a structure uh and a venue for
the movie The warped side of the
universe and they ran with it and
changed our story almost completely and
made it into a great film I don't but
the the all the seeds came out of Lindon
and me at the time I mean you're you're
Professor Caltech the Richard fan
professor at Caltech now Emeritus CCH is
a pretty high level Place how was it
viewed for you to say guys hold on I'm
going to make a movie now what is that
how is that received by your colleagues
uh I think they were all enthusiastic
bch is a different kind of a place than
some other more stuffy un
oh okay okay I never hung out much at
Caltech I couldn't judge the mood or the
tone yeah no look we're on the edge of
Hollywood uh the Hollywood folks come
over and you know Big Bang Theory was
based on calch right call it calch what
did they call it they did call it calch
in the first few uh episodes okay and
then they stopped using the calch name
because the shirts that that's Hollywood
speak for the attorneys oh yeah the
stiff shirts yes yes up in the office
the shirts got scared that they might do
something on a screen that the Caltech
shirts wouldn't like and the Caltech
shirts might sue the the Hollywood
shirts so they stopped using Caltech
name and in the in the film which I
adored um what's it called Real Genius
yeah Real Genius they were at Pacific
Tech all right that was the where all
the smart kids were so of course pasaden
is in like I can't say foothills of
Hollywood but you you you have a
proximal awareness of this huge industry
and you know that science fiction
matters as a as a genre well and some of
us love it I love it I'm I'm signed up
every time and so uh
Interstellar uh I think it introduced
many people to
authentic gravitational physics for the
very first time well Ander Celler was
unlike almost any other film I I think
were precursors in 2001 and in contact
Yeah Carl San's contact Carl San's
contact and and the the point is that
science lots of science was baked into
that film from the very beginning
because of the way it was born and
because of the close close collaboration
I had with the Nolan
brothers and buil in right from the very
beginning baked in baked in and and a
science that uh in which the guid line
that we worked from is that uh nothing
in the movie would violate
well-established physical laws and all
the wild things would at least spring
from science in some manner any good
science fiction story should be but
there's not enough well there's nothing
wrong with fantasy uh films the Harry
Potter style for example it's just a
different genre by the way that film uh
you
you must have known you said okay we
we're going to have to help people out
give a guy a break okay they're trying
to see the movie they're trying to
follow what's going on what the hell's
happening why did the guy get old who
why is he younger than his mother what's
going on and you up and said let's help
Let's help a person out yeah well it I
would put it a little differently it was
I saw it as a superb opportunity to use
this uh film as a motivator and to get
people interested or intrigued in
science and then there would be a bridge
to uh the science through this book
admit it you created a Gateway film it
it was a Gateway film yes so the science
of interstellar yeah New York Times
bestseller Kip Thorne with a forward
written by of course Christopher Nolan
and it says spoiler alert uh this book
explains the Fantastic Climax and ending
of interstellar and so let me tell you
how that came this issue came about
Chris said to me early on I would like
to make a film where the ending is as
mysterious as the ending of 2001 Space
Odyssey that's a high bar that's a high
bar but he greatly admires Stanley kubri
and and that film and so somewhat later
on as we were talking about the ending
and we had lots of conversations about
the ending he said well you can explain
the ending in this book that you're
planning to
write so he volunteered you to write the
book
well no I was already planning to write
the book but uh he identified that as
the place where the eny will get
explained he was not going to explain
the he would leave it mysterious not in
his film he was pulling a a kubric on us
that's right uh in fact we uh
interviewed Christopher Nolan if you're
an archive diver uh we've got a whole
episode with Christopher Nolan even
before Interstellar was uh produced and
as we know so many of his movies he
plays with time in some kind of
interesting way if I remember correctly
he talks about how influential 2001
Space Odyssey was to him back in 1968
that that would have been yes um so let
me ask you just a couple of things about
the story line and I and I have I have
an issue with it if I may but I know I
don't know if I ever went public on this
but I figur I I'm in front of the man
himself so I if I have an issue they
would be here and now you're GNA you're
going to get turned into a journalist
who's challenging me going to give me a
tough time yeah I got to I can't this
can't be just
all okay softball let play a little hard
ball so I guess my issue we're looking
for a planet again this is in the themes
of the of the movie we're looking for a
planet like Earth similar enough to
Earth that we can send people there to
continue our civilization and our
species is that a fair characterization
of a plot line of the plot line okay and
it turns out there's like a wormhole
that can make that happen a little
faster because otherwise you don't live
long enough to travel the distances with
the Rockets available to hit those
destinations okay I'm just thinking this
blight on the crops that was starving
everyone on Earth requiring that we jump
ship literally jump ship to go find
another ship another spaceship
Planet it seems to me that whatever
effort it takes to find another Earth
travel through a wormhole ship a billion
to terraform it ship a billion people
there whatever that effort is seems to
me to be a bigger effort than just
telling the biologist come up with a
serum that could fix the crops even
today we have full knowledge of crop gen
genomes just fix it whatever is just go
in there Nip Tuck the DNA fix it isn't
that cheaper easier
faster than worm holing your way off
this planet that's my that's where I'm
coming from do you think that all
problems can be solved by humans with
human technology a time scale you have
such faith in come on so I'm The
Optimist here okay so let let me
describe this this characterizes how
that this movie was done so when it was
uh Jonah Nolan Chris's brother who came
up with the idea that he wanted a blight
or something like that and so we said
okay we will bring together the best
biologists we can who are experts on
these kinds of things uh put together uh
uh most mostly calch biologists uh and
and we had a dinner and we brought out
very expensive wine for them to drink
and we set up a recording in vino
veritos okay in truth there is wine yes
in wine there is truth yes and uh so uh
we I had a conversation that lasted
about three three or four hours at the
Caltech Faculty Club the aam about what
could we what would be the best
backstory here there are two types of
blights there are generalized blights
that attack lots of crops and there are
different species ofs lots of different
species of crops but they are generally
uh fairly benign blights and then there
are uh uh blights that are very specific
to a particular crop and they can be
very lethal blights uh that may totally
wipe out that species on Earth even but
basically for Earth to Sur Earth and
life on Earth to survive uh you better
not have a vicious generalized light
light but according to the biologists
that I discussed this with they didn't
know of anything that would prevent the
development of a very vicious
generalized blight so that's what occurs
in this movie and it's something that
that biologists have never seen but they
cannot uh rule it out rule it out okay
so let me repeat what I think you said
said they have vicious lethal blights
that attack a species less lethal
generalized blights that cross species
boundaries and they can't rule out a
lethal
flight that would cross species that's
right and so that's what's happening in
this what's happening in the film and
okay and that's what they just
biologist in this in the back so there's
I'll give you that okay okay so anyway
there this film is full of backstories
because of the way we did it it's as I
say again it's unlike almost any other
film and that uh these issues were uh
like that vetted were vetted by the
world's best experts in the process of
the writing of the screenplay okay as
we're diving into Kip Thor's impressive
work one thing is clear his theories
have reshaped our understanding of the
universe so you might think the latest
Nobel Prize for physics would go to some
like Thorne but it went to computer
scientists instead their contributions
to machine learning is undeniable but
still a surprise for the world of
physics some reports focus on the
Godfather of AI regretting his invention
While others don't exactly see the
problem in moments like this access to
diverse perspectives is critical making
ground news essential there're a
platform created by a former NASA
engineer who saw a bigger problem down
here on Earth than up in space and the
way we consume information and how
heavily that shapes Our World Views
ground news responsibly uses technology
to add Clarity to a world full of
opposing opinions by showing
perspectives from around the world how
reliable sources and blind spots so you
can see important stories barely
receiving attention here's why that
matters critical thinking drives the
pursuit of understanding complex
Concepts it challenges established
beliefs and it's the only way we can
make new discoveries so for those of us
who are curious enough to dive into New
Perspectives now is the perfect time to
give ground news a try take advantage of
their massive 50% discount on their top
tier Vantage plan and get access to
every feature we've shown and more for
only a limited time use our Link at
ground. news/ StarTalk or scan the QR
code to subscribe
as we continue exploring Kip Thorn's
groundbreaking series remember ground
news can bring that same level of
critical thinking to how you stay
informed now back to the show well I got
another
one okay you're one for one all right
when they're on the black hole Planet
okay uh and then they see this wave
coming okay it's Miller's planet
planet the planet orbiting gargantuan
Gargantua okay the strength of title
forces are highly sensitive to the
distance you are to that which is
causing the tides highly sensitive okay
but every illustration I've drawn or
taught about Tides they're not so peaky
they're much broader in their
representation on a planet and so there
they are waiting in water
but then they see this single wave come
and if it is a single wave as we've seen
with tsunamis it actually takes water
away from what's ahead of it because it
can't just be water out of nowhere it's
drawing water from its vicinity so my
two issues was if it's tidal would it be
that peaky and if it's any kind of wave
how could it still leave the water
laying around its vicinity and then just
be that big as it came by so there is a
type of wave called a solitary wave on
water that was you could tell me you
brought wave people together and had
that lunch what you talk
no this particular kind of wave was
discovered in the 1700s wow by I've
forgotten who a a a physicist in in
England who saw a boat that was being
pulled by horses and it was just
starting up and it created this wave
that traveled down a channel a canal uh
and it was peaked like the wave in
interstellar though the wave and
Interstellar I have to admit it was
exaggerated there was exaggeration there
was some exaggeration in the peak but
but it traveled down the channel it
never
broke most waves at the ocean they break
they okay just so we can get the picture
because we're talking about centuries
ago uh when you see a channel that would
be a Channel or canal canal and then
there's a toe path on the side and then
and then people and more likely beasts
of Burden would drag things through the
canal cuz themselves don't typically
have current drag a barge down the canal
a barge exactly and so this barge was
dragged down the canal uh and it was
just starting up and it created this
wave that uh on the startup on the
startup and it just headed out and just
took off and went down the channel and
this this guy got got on his horse and
he followed down the channel and it went
and got to love curious physicists
Nothing Gets By it went went down the
channel for I I don't know a mile or two
uh without changing its shape without
breaking without breaking and so the
theory of these waves
is is that there there are two different
effects that cause a wave to steepen uh
or disperse and the two can balance each
other out stable sort of a way and give
it longer life and give it long life uh
and so aside from the issue of friction
if for there were no friction it would
just live forever and keep propagating
in a very stable way it's there's a
mathematics behind it something called
the COV de equation that this is a
solution of but anyway these waves then
so so that equation I presume has both
kinds of waves uh in equilibrium somehow
represented the STA W the
dispersion and and and the steepening
the steepening is due to nonlinearities
the dispersion is due to the fact that
that the higher wave the higher parts of
the water travel faster than the lower
parts of the water if you're at the
ocean you see a little tiny wave it
travels quite slowly you see a big wave
it travels quite fast and that's why the
the crest of the wave will actually
break before the rest of the wave gets
there is that part the reason that's
right that's right unless that's being
balanced out by dispersion which
is anyway I love it good good I'm loving
it I'm getting a slightly confused but
anyway the two the two effects balance
each other and to produce uh this very
stable uh solitary wave and so in the
movie but in for this stable solitary
wave the height of the
wave is and I forgotten the number but
it's something like six times higher
than the depth of the water got it so
there's a problem now in the movie
because they're walking around in
shallow water and this wave is high and
so it's got to be deep water okay but
they're but but they're on an
island this is the backstory again
there's always a backstory oh so they're
on a a Subterranean a sub surface Island
yeah you got to read it in my
book They're they're they're they're
on they're on on an island and this wave
defract around the island they hardly
notice the island at all so so again
there's it's it's all explainable except
there is a bit of exaggeration the the
in the CGI uh wave was made uh somewhat
more Peak somewh give you that it's a
movie and it's Hollywood but what you're
saying is this wave might have been
caused by some effect other than the
tital forces of the black hole Yeah well
this wave is caused in fact by the fact
that this uh time is is very is much
slowed on this uh yes on this planet so
the planet has been uh put into the
orbit around Gargantua not that long ago
is seen uh on the
planet though it's a long long time ago
was seen from far away and it is it's
like Mercury like the moon keeps one
face toward Earth or Mercury capes one
face toward the sun due to Tidal effects
this planet is distorted by tidal
effects and it's swinging back and forth
it has not yet settled down uh to one
face toward the planet and that swinging
back and forth is generating this wave
that's all in the book he weasel out of
another one
okay there's an enormous amount of
Science in that I must have missed that
when I went through the book and one
last point you didn't study it carefully
enough
one last point we uh took our show to
Oxford yeah recently and uh interviewed
a an Oxford I think it was a
postto and I name Andrew Mumy postto and
he showed us a recent paper he published
I don't know if you've seen it recently
like within the past 18 months and uh
he's a the radical physicist and he in
alerted me something I'd never knew uh I
love the field but it's not my active
professional field that in the vicinity
of a black hole there is an innermost
orbit because of course you can orbit
any source of gravity even if it's a
black hole but for black holes in
particular there's an orbit within which
the orbit is no longer stable and it
will spiral into the black hole itself
and according to his calculation to get
the time dilation necessary in this
scene with the black hole Planet which
was huge remember they were on the
planet for like 15 minutes or whatever
how long 1 hour on the planet is seven
years up at high seven years up in their
spaceship okay and the guy who they left
there he was like gray and unshaven and
everything and we're like oh my gosh
there's some serious einsteinian physics
going on here his calculation showed
that for that difference for that
extreme difference in time d
requires that planet orbit so close to
the black hole they would be on an unst
in the unstable Zone and so I I just
thought I'd tell you that my calculation
says
otherwise so so so and where's his Nobel
Prize the other guy the formula is in
the book in in this book yeah so so you
so we don't have to go to your graduate
textbook for that well not for the
answer okay if you want can to to derive
the formula that's a lot of work so let
me tell you the story behind this got a
story okay so Christoper Nolan says to
me one day he says I
want the uh hero and Cooper the hero in
this movie to go down onto this planet
Cooper played by Matthew MCC that's
right Professor Bran's daughter is
played by Jessica Jessica
chest Chris Christopher Nolan says to me
he says I want in this movie
that one hour on Miller's planet is 7
years up at very high orbit or back on
Earth he prescribed that and I said to
him that's impossible because the planet
will fall into the black hole he said go
do a real calculation I've already
learned that your offthe cuff reactions
can be wrong and I should not trust you
unless you do a real calculation there's
a good Hollywood producer go back and
give me the answer I'm looking for well
well and so I went back home and I did a
real calculation and I was amazed uh
that the last stable circular orbit
which is what we're talking about uh is
uh if this planet spins fast enough last
circular stable orbit can have as high a
a a high a red shift as high a time
difference as you might wish but that
requires the dilation it requires black
hole spin extremely close to the maximum
possible Spin and so in the book I give
the formula for what is the uh the spin
of the black hole that is required to
produce a given amount of slowing of
time did not know that and and that and
so that it's an approximate formula but
it's a formula that can be derived
though takes takes a fair bit of algebra
okay so the one one would just learn
about would probably be that the lowest
stable orbit around a nonrotating black
hole that's right and that's a clean
that's that's a clean problem and that
clean problem that's that's what I was
thinking
when this when I knew that if I made the
black hole spin that it would get closer
but I couldn't imagine I could not
imagine that it that nature would
provide
it a
orbit for a black hole that spins fast
enough that they could provide this much
of a slowing of time it does it does at
least unless I made a mathematical error
but I don't think that's like because I
because I used
Mathematica okay you had tools to help
you do this because check my
calculations because it was it's not
just an analytic solution well it is an
analytic solution but it's very
complicated it's very complicated you
okay well it's a power series solution
in the end I think the our hero
character is inside the black hole we
come to understand understand this and
he has access to a timeline that
wouldn't otherwise be available to him
and he sees his
daughter's
bookshelf well he's no longer inside the
black hole where is he when he's doing
this so this is the key thing that's not
explicit that you only understand if you
read my book you didn't read it well
enough busted no I I I read a lot of it
let me say I what I read I read some of
the biology it was a long time ago too
yes okay so so he when he gets inside
the Black Hole uh he is scooped up by a
a a spacecraft that was built by this
Advanced civilization that provided the
uh the Wormhole uh to him and to
humanity and it's called the Tess act
and it's a tesseract is a
four-dimensional cube four spatial
dimensions and that's why in there you
saw
uh I guess the past and future all kind
of
simultaneously it felt very higher
dimensional that's
right this Tess he so so so let me back
up I'll tell you a
story so early on in when we were
working on the film uh uh Christopher
Nolan said to me he wanted uh to take
his hero back to Earth Cooper back to
Earth uh by a different route than the
Wormhole 10 billion lot years away from
the earth how's he going to do it if it
doesn't go through a wormhole he said
well I want to take him back faster in
the speed of light and of course I say
to Chris you can't do that it violates
the laws of physics he says go do a real
calculation I said I don't have to do a
real
calculation and so we discussed this for
a week and then he uh threw in the tow
he said okay I believe you and so what
do we do and so I said well uh you put
him he goes inside the black hole he uh
gets deposited on the three-dimensional
surface of a four-dimensional sphere and
this four-dimensional sphere is a
spacecraft that go can go into the bulk
into the higher Dimension and it take
goes out of the black hole not through
the Horizon it can't do that it goes up
go through the fourth dimension up
through the fourth space Dimension or
what's called The Fifth Dimension in the
movie this time is the fourth dimension
and goes back to Earth and the distance
back to the Earth is less than the
distance between the Earth and the uh
Sun even though it's 10 billion light
years inside of our universe up in the
bulk it's a very short distance and so
he can get back quickly this is the
higher dimensional SpaceTime in which we
are now having this so he gets back very
quickly uh riding on the surface of this
four dimensional sphere he said I like
it all entirely except I'm not going I'm
going to use a four-dimensional cube
instead of a four dimensional sphere
that's a tesseract yes and uh so that's
what happens and you when you see Cooper
out there sort of flailing around uh at
the beginning of the test scene he's
being carried by the test back to Earth
but you don't know that's what happening
until you read my book by agreement
between Chris and me that's that's the
only way anyone's ever going to know so
anyway he's carried back to Earth and
then everything is happening when the
cact is docked uh in the higher
Dimension beside his uh giving access to
his life in that past time that's right
so it's it's docked in his home by his
in his daughter's bedroom okay so now
he's pushing books off the shelves that
land on the floor and through some
clever cryptographic judgment he's
spelling out words with the first letter
of the title of each book okay here's my
issue I had no problems with tessaract
black hole fourth dimension five
Dimensions how does he know the title of
each
book from the other side of the book so
I don't remember that's how he's
actually uh he's pushing books out I
know he's push I know he's pushing he's
pushing B out from this side yeah yeah
and all he sees is the other side of the
library
I I guess I had forgotten that he was uh
spelling things out based on the first
word oh you forgot I forgot or I didn't
know or you're are you're
wrong so that was one of my I little
issue there that that that one I don't
know oh okay okay I don't know okay so
you're you're three for
four he he Pro he probably has he
probably has a photographic memory the
other side of the
book what's this I hear that you can use
a wormhole to travel backwards in time
does the math check out does the
einsteinian physics check out and does
that mean I will just show up a younger
version of myself and shake my own hand
is that what you mean by that or do I no
longer exist in the time that I left for
my younger version of myself to see that
and wasn't there I didn't Hawking put
forth a time
travel prevention conjecture or
something was what what's going on there
so this is all an outgrowth of my phone
conversation with Carl
Sean uh when he was uh working on the
novel for contact where uh he triggered
me to start thinking about
wormholes and then having started to
think about wormholes it became pretty
obvious to me rather quickly that if uh
I give my wife car Le one mouth of a
wormhole and she carries it at high
speeed in a rocket ship out into space
and then back and I keep the other wor
mouth at
home and uh if she she sees me age by 50
years back on Earth well she AG is only
one year going out and coming back but
if we look Through the Wormhole at each
other uh we see each other aging at the
same rate just imagine uh we hold hands
and we look at each other's wrist
watches they're it's ticking away at the
same rate so through the wor Through the
Wormhole we've aged at the same rate
we're the same age but uh looking
throughout outward through outside the
world a normal universe
all she's aged one year and I've aged 50
years something weird has happened the
Wormhole has become a time machine I
just go over and go into her mouth
Wormhole mouth and come out I'll meet my
younger self okay now Hawkings said this
is no we're not going to allow this
there's some
conjecture yet to be discovered that'll
tell you you can't do that well so know
the story we get there you're going too
fast I'm going too fast sorry so so I
then I talked to friends at the
University of Chicago physics it's
crucial to talk to friends they tell you
where you're all at you tell you when
you made a mistake they straighten you
out and they pointed out to me that uh
it might be that when the time machine
is turned on it'll self-destruct
basically they said I
said I don't understand they said go do
a calculation so I went and did a
calculation and the issue is
and they had guessed and basically
that's oversimplified but they Bob gach
and Robert Wald at
Chicago anyway it turns out that at the
moment that you can first time travel
the F the first thing that go goes
through it can be vacuum
fluctuations of light say that Ender her
mouth of the Wormhole come out of my
mouth and go back and arrive back at the
her mouth at the very moment they
started out now you have twice as much
at the same place in space and time so
this is a runaway so it's a runaway and
so they you now have twice as much and
then it goes around again now you have
four times as much goes around again so
this runaway uh builds up just like the
the feedback between a microphone and a
speaker precisely and it just runs away
it just runs away and runs away and and
this runaway shows up in the quantum
mechanical calculation that that I did
you're bumming me out dude together with
San Kim a Korean post of mine okay I
want to be a movie director and say go
hiip go home and figure out how to do
this give me another pull another rabbit
out of the Hat here well anyway we
discovered this Stephen I think and one
of his stepen Hawking uh and a student
of his I think had more or less the same
Discovery at the same time except step
probably just did it all in his head
because the way Steven is anyway so uh
then Steven and I started corresponding
about it by email and talking on the
phone about it and so forth it appeared
to me looking at at the details of the
calculation that uh in fact the
explosion if I designed the time machine
just right the details of the explosion
this explosion would not be strong
enough to destroy the Wormhole uh and
Stephen then showed me that that I was
wrong and we argued back and forth for a
while finally we came to agree that the
explosion becomes strong enough that
quantum gravity enters in and then holds
the answer tightly in its grip and so we
won't know whether time machine self
destructs until we understand the laws
of quantum gravity let me be on obscure
but then we come to the Hawkins Cosmic
sensor ship conjecture that's what it's
called yeah he the conjecture that in
fact in the end the laws of quantum
gravity won't save the day the Wormhole
will be destroyed and any time machine
any advanced civilization makes will be
destroyed when they try to turn it on by
these vacuum
fluctuations uh and thereby as Hawkings
says keeping the universe safe for
historians of all species
it reminds me of the ultraviolet
catastrophe MH where you run the
calculation this is going to blow up how
does this even work and then outcomes
the discovery of the quantum which Saves
the Day right and this is could be a
calculation waiting for another branch
of physics to open or or another
progress no in the known branches of
physics to resolve the loo team has has
perfected a technique called quantum
Precision measurement which is based on
manipulating vacuum
fluctuations uh in order to circumvent
the uncertainty principle and so this
business of manipulating vacuum
fluctuations is something we do in
modern physics if memory serves Carl
Sean came up to you and said for contact
I want to go far
distances quickly how am I going to do
it can you cook up a wormhole for me
Carl me uh
in well back in the
80s when he's writing the novel
obviously the no pred of the movie
that's right and he said that he wanted
uh that he has written he'd already
written this the book The Novel it was
already in page proofs and he said I've
got this novel it's in page proof the
publisher is not going to be happy if I
change it but I really need some help
see what the truth is and then we'll
figure out how to deal with this and uh
he said that I have my heroin traveling
through a black hole to get to the star
of AA and I said that's rather dangerous
there's a singularity in there okay
there's a singularity in there and you
can't get through get to the star of
Vega so what you actually need is a
wormhole uh but there is is an issue
that wormholes implode they collapse so
quick that nothing can get through but
I'll see if I can figure out how how to
hold the Wormhole open just for you
Carl and so and so I was go I was going
with it's like rent a physicist right
it's like whatever your needs are so so
I was getting in a car that that morning
to ride uh with my uh former wife to our
daughter's grad uation up at Santa Cruz
so Lind Linda was said I'll drive and
you
calculate so okay so she drove and I
calculated and I fiddled around and then
it became fairly obvious turns out
somebody other some other physicist
figure this out sooner but I that's the
usual thing with me I I figure it out
then then I go see did people know this
before or not so so anyway I figured out
that uh
you if you had what I like to call
exotic matter that repels
gravitationally and you put it inside
the throat of a wormhole that can hold
the Wormhole open it' be like pushing it
outward that's right it basically repels
the the walls of Wormhole to hold them
open and it turns out that that that
will do it but you have to
have you have to have enough exotic
matter to hold the Wormhole open and uh
I deduced a formula for for how much you
had to have Bas and it basically says
the following uh if you move Through the
Wormhole let the record show he's about
to describe how to make a wormhole no no
only how to hold it only how much EX got
matter you that sounds like a recipe to
me but so you you travel Through the
Wormhole as close to the speed of light
as you possibly
can just very close to the speed of
light and you
you add up all the the energy density
all the way through the Wormhole of
stuff that's in the Wormhole the net has
to be negative and then you can hold the
Wormhole open so it basically means
you've got more negative energy than
there than positive enery we have
nothing known as exotic matter oh yes we
do what yeah and so that oh is is this
in your basement
is what do you mean oh what what what do
you mean oh yes we do what what okay
what what is our exotic matter that
would fulfill this purpose so so if you
should we turn off the camera
now are are the is the government going
to show up on your in your
driveway okay go well I I learned about
this from Yakov barovich zovich in
Moscow zovic zovic was one of the
inventers of the Russian hydrogen bomb
okay and I learned this from him all
right okay he was really brilliant I
learned about
about vacuum fluctuations and how
important they can be and what how
powerful it can be if you can manipulate
them and uh so and so if you take a box
and you remove everything that can
possibly re be removed from the box
you're left in the end with tiny
fluctuations of everything that c
possibly could have been in the
box so
electric Fields you have fluctuating
electric Fields fluctuating magnetic
fields fluctuating protons
electrons fluctuating NE Ty the grass
Tyson so this this creates a form of
pressure inside the Box well so the ne
there's Vanishing pressure and that
Vanishing energy due to
renormalization that's a Nast that's a
nasty word in physics but
uh the the
uh well me we can you can measure energy
by whether it produces gravity or not
and uh although these fluctuations that
are there it you can think them as
particles say particles of light
flashing in and out of existence
randomly so why isn't this not the
virtual particles that people speak of
so it's virtual particles it is that
okay we we've spoken about those on our
show before okay so you have
Green in fact so you have virtual
particles uh in the vacuum popping in
and out of existence popping in and and
you can't stop it you can't prevent it
however you can take fluctuations from
one region and borrow them and put them
in another adjacent region for a little
while or if you put an
electrically conducting a sheet say a
sheet of of of superconducting metal
here then that will suppress the
fluctuating electric Fields parallel to
the metal because they would create an
infant current flowing in that metal and
that would that that would wipe out the
the electric field parallel to the metal
and so uh is is that an element of the
Kazmir effect yes that's the Casmir
effect is yeah where you have two
parallel plates evacuated between them
right and there's a point where they
actually feel a whole other Force
attracting so what that Force really is
is uh in the region between them uh the
vacuum fluctuations are suppressed and
so you have negative energy in between
that energ negative energy is sucking
them together and you have you have you
and they can do work on you if you
you're holding on to these plates uh and
they attract each other put energ to
resist you put you put energy in as they
go as they go together they do work on
you the electric electromagnetic field
between two plates in the casmer effect
uh is exotic okay and so so you have
this in your basement is what you're
telling me well I don't have it in my
basement but but physicists do this let
me just say as a side remark H Having
learned a lot about vacuum
fluctuations we in ligo in our gravity
wave project get to that get to that
I'll just just make the remark that we
have we the loo team has has perfected a
technique called Quantum Precision
measurement which is based on
manipulating vacuum
fluctuations uh in order to circumvent
the uncertainty principle and so this
business of manipulating vacuum
fluctuations is something we do in
modern physics and it is something then
that uh you can imagine you can ask can
a very Advanced
civilization manipulate vacuum
fluctuations adequately in order to make
enough exotic matter inside a wormhole
to hold the Wormhole open and so I POS
this as a a question to my physicist
colleagues uh stimulated by Carl San and
want him wanting to send his heroin
through a black hole I said no use a
wormhole and so we got a pulled it open
and so physic colleagues please help
Carl and figure out can an advanced
civilization do this and the answer is
we still don't know uh 40 years later
now we still don't know right well we're
doing magic compared to what anyone
thought was possible 50 that's right
years ago certainly the dawn of quantum
physics we're on the Centennial of the
decade of quantum Discovery back in the
1920s well I had was very close friends
with Carl San and I've developed close
friendship with Christopher Nolan Chris
has a very different background than me
he knows a lot of science but he's
learned all by browsing the web and uh
he uh and he knows it well enough to ask
me hard questions that's just like you
do uh but he asked them first so I have
the answers now so so he and and have
inspired me to ask questions that and
then I sort of translate to and give to
colleagues because my colleagues are
smarter than I am my my my uh role is is
to pass on interesting conduit for this
conduit for interesting question for my
colleagues to work on so dude you can't
leave well enough alone Einstein says
maybe there are gravitational waves
emanating from major gravitational
disturbances in the universe and you got
to go up and find them but you're not
the first to have attempted this right I
at the University of Maryland there was
Weber I think I think what's his first
name Joe Weber of course who had a
cylinder if I remember
correctly uh where he was trying to
measure whether if a gravitational wave
washed over it he could detect a
distortion in the shape of the cylinder
I think was the goal yeah well he would
the gravitational wave would drive
vibrations of the cylinder end to end
vibrations okay and uh so he
instrumented it to search for uh changes
in the amplitude and phase of vibrations
of the cylinder cylinder is at a finite
temperature so it's always vibrating a
little bit because it's the finite
temperature and uh so and so he
instrumented it uh with what's called at
electric transducers transducers that he
that he glued around the uh middle of
the cylinder that when they were
squeezed they would generate an
electrical voltage that he could measure
and there they're amazing things this p
Electric transducer is just absolutely
amazing you squeeze them a tiny tiny bit
and you get a big voltage out uhuh and I
mean Joe Weber was tremendously creative
he was and he I think he was working on
that while I was at the University of
Marland I was there in the 80s I think
he was still working on it yeah that's
right so he began working on it uh in
the uh late 60s early 70s and uh uh
announced that he was seeing possible
evidence for gravitation waves in there
was a lot of skepticism at the time if I
remember let let me I'm sorry he started
working out in the late 50s early 60s
announced in
69 that he was uh seeing some possible
evidence of gravitational waves and a
number of
other physicists around the world built
similar detectors and the bottom line in
the end after a period of shaking out
was that others were not seeing grav
ation waves and that's the only way
science works is one person's result is
not a result until somebody else a
competitor somebody else who uses
different wall current somebody from
another country you need you need
multiple verifications but on the other
hand uh Weber Joe he started the field
he triggered this work the Theo the
approach that he invented for searching
for gravitational waves was the dominant
approach from then until uh the 2000s
and the number of other research groups
built similar detectors and improved
them better and better and better uh
over that period of time on that model
on that model the model so so I mean I
have enormous uh respect for for what he
did sure now you now you decided to you
and others uh decided to look
differently for them so Ray Weiss Riner
Weiss Ray his friends call him at MIT
was the primary inventor of an
alternative technique that was the
technique that ultimately succeeded uh
he invented it he wrote he wrote a a
technical paper about the technique that
identified all the noise kinds of noise
that you would have to deal with and
explained how you how you might deal
with them and did an analysis of how
good this detector could be and he put
there there's the recipe paper so oh my
gosh it was a recipe for for how to go
forward and he he wrote this in
1972 and Ry being Ry didn't publish this
because he I think he figured you don't
publish until you have built one and
seen a gravitational way so but however
Ray sent copies of this around all his
colleagues and uh he put it into
quarterly reports of the MIT laboratory
in which he worked and so it it is
probably the most influential
non-published paper certainly that I
know of in physics I mean it was it was
a t to force and it triggered uh the
huge effort that that actually succeeded
I was fortunate enough to to visit uh
the cuz there were two Lego experiments
one in Louisiana and the other one is
in Hanford Washington why do you have
two because you can't just have one
result yeah they you're looking for a an
effect that is so small that you
wouldn't believe it unless you see it on
two independent instruments there you go
so you've got these
pathways are they kilometer long 4 km 4
km long
evacuated you send a beam of light that
is split from a sink beam laser that
split it goes to these are at 90 angles
and they go to the end they get
reflected back and you rejoin them and
you want to see if their waves line up
and if they line up then each direction
is identical you can go home if they're
slightly different then one of these
legs experienced a different
encounter with the fabric of the
SpaceTime Continuum than the other did
so that's that's you know that's so
actually what you want to do is you make
them slightly different in the first
place but then so that means you send
you send your laser light in from this
direction uh there's a beam splitter
where the light gets split in two to go
down the two arms uh so laser G goes in
like that there's this beam splitter so
it the light gets split in two into one
arm in that direction the other arm in
this direction uh and uh then it comes
back and recombines in the beam splitter
the laser light was coming in from this
direction uh uh but when it
recombines a little bit of light goes
out uh in a perpendicular Direction so
you have a laser here and you have an
output over there and the out put
direction is the direction that has a
signal and if the if the length of one
arm is shortened and the length of the
other arm is in length and that would
only happen because a gravitational wave
washed over that arm that's right then
you get a change in how much light is
coming out to the output all right so
this you're trying to find a a change a
length difference and if I remember the
materials from the press releases
that is equivalent
to10th the diameter of a proton no it's
equivalent to uh it's 10 million times
smaller than an atom and 100 times
smaller than a proton 100th this the
diameter of a proton meanwhile all the
world is vibrating because everything is
at a temperature and and cool it as much
as you want there's still vibrations and
and and somebody is walking down the
street I I remember being on campus
there can I call it a campus that's what
it was and you can you can
detect cars on the road a mile
away you have to insulate this that's
half the science done for the experiment
you should get a Nobel Prize for
that well that's that's what that's what
the Nobel Prize was given for for that
yeah to have successful
isolated the effect you're trying to
measure so so the way I like to describe
it is you're trying to you're bouncing
light off these
mirrors and you're looking for a motion
of the mirrors that is 10 million times
smaller than the atoms of which the
mirrors are
made and uh well the
mirrors the atoms in the mirrors
themselves are vibrating because they're
at finite temperature by an amount that
is about the same as their size so that
million times smaller than uh the atoms
and 10 million times smaller than the uh
vibrations the atoms are undergoing so
once again in physics there's a
phenomenon we're trying to measure but
it's kind of
buried and you need a way to get to it
and it seems like half if not more than
half of the effort is how brilliant is
your engineer that you've brought on to
the task to accompl accomplish this how
good are your tools it's not just the
idea it's now you got to make the damn
measurement and it's not obvious you
need very talented people assembled for
this absolutely and so that was the
issue is how good a team can you put
together uh so when I learned of Ray
Weiss's idea and I saw and I knew
roughly how strong the strongest
gravitational waves be I knew already
then that uh it would be necessary to
this would be the Collision of two black
holes of two black Hol and you can't
just summon that up there has to be real
things in the universe that might
produce that right right you can't just
wish for but based on what we knew about
the universe at the time I was
estimating a wave strength that was
roughly correct and it was at that level
that you would have to monitor the
motion of these mirrors at
10 million times smaller than the atams
in the mirrors and I thought to myself
that's
crazy and so in this book which was
published in
1973 we went to press just after Ray
Weiss wrote his seminal paper I had not
yet uh really studied that paper fully
uh but I I just knew uh that this was
crazy and so it describes in a few words
Ray's idea in here and then it
says I think there's an exercise where
it says show why this is not very
promising just a mild gentle because it
is a textbook right you get to you get
to declare that the students students
challenge to show well it could not be a
very good idea in
1973 but fast forward a half a century
right so so it is 1850
flying is not a good idea right on why
flying isn't a good idea yeah but so but
that was the central issue if if we
worked for a few
decades did we have a shot at success in
1973 I thought no no way but by
1975 I had turned around I'd had long
conversations with Rey I'd had long
conversations with Vladimir binsky a
colleague in
Moscow i' done lots of calculations of
my own and I came to the conclusion that
you had had a real shot at
success if you put together a superbly
strong team and you worked at it for a
few decades and you need money and you
you were well supported I think by the
National Science Foundation well not yet
so at that point and NSF had given Rey
$60,000 to get
started and uh $6,000 that's that that's
how much he had in the 1970s from the
National Science Foundation he also had
some money from the Air Force office of
scientific research I'm not sure how
much he had or he had had that until
until in the Vietnam era they stopped
supporting science uh due to something
called the Mansfield Amendment American
politics and that's when NSF picked him
up and gave him 60,000 that was a drop
in the bucket compared what was needed
and n St wasn't about ready to put big
money in this required some members of
your team to like appear in front of
Congress to defend this that's that's
that's correct and uh and uh but that
was much later the issue was getting
started and so how did we get started
Caltech is a very different kind of an
institution than any other I've ever
dealt with Caltech I was able to say to
propose to my colleagues that we get
into this field that we uh uh build a
experimental program in parallel with
Ray Weiss's program at MIT so my co the
chair of the division of physics
mathematics and astronomy at Caltech set
up a committee to look at it committee
uh looked at it for about six months
detailed study came back and
enthusiastic said let's go ahead and so
Caltech put private money about $2
million of its own private money to get
started and uh that inflates about $12
million today oh of private money when
when nobody else is putting anything in
not you're right that's a very different
CL a very different culture at Caltech
as you describ that had happened and we
had brought Ron dver from Scotland to
start the experimental effort then NSF
and NSF stood up and took notice they
did their own study of this and came up
with the same conclusion and they
started funding us us and Ray Weiss and
it became a Caltech MIT collaboration
let's fast forward to
2016 uh where you make the first
detection announc it in 16 you announced
it in 16 by the way I would later learn
that when I visited the facility in
Louisiana you already had made the
detection and You' be happy to know that
everyone was completely zip mouthed
about
until it was officially because I I I
have this huge like internet following
right and people were totally zip
mouthed I swear I didn't know about it
until the press release came yeah we we
were all sworn the secret yes yes and so
the the confirmation of a first
detection came from the second facility
built in Hanford and at that point you
have a time delay because gravitational
waves move at the speed of light correct
so and Earth is a finite size and so all
that worked out yeah yeah so it was just
seven milliseconds 7 a second time
difference because the waves came up
from the south they entered the Earth
around the tip of the Antarctic
Peninsula traveled through the
Earth came up through the Earth at in
Louisiana first and then Washington
State second 7 milliseconds later this
is and and then the waves were
unaffected by all the matter of the
earth they just they and they couldn't
see the difference between Earth and no
Earth and they couldn't see the
difference between detector and no
detector they were very hard to do and
their thing so what impresses me greatly
is here we have a prediction made by
Albert Einstein when in in 1916 or 15
whatever Albert Einstein in a little
known fact I mean physicists know but I
don't think the public knows Einstein
laid out the equations for the
stimulated emission of radiation which
is the physical Foundation of a laser
yeah that's he he wrote that down first
Y and a laser would take a few decades
to actually be built into the 1950s and
I'm just saying here's Einstein
predicting gravitational waves laying
the foundation for a laser and a hundred
years later his gravitational waves are
found with lasers yes so these are
crumbs spilling off his plate Einstein
was kind of
smart and lo and behold nobody surprised
the Nobel Prize goes to this project um
and you along with Ray Weiss and Barry
barish uh share the Nobel Prize what
year was that oh 2017 yeah so they
apologized to us they didn't give us in6
because uh we didn't announce it until
uh past their deadline for well plus
they delay anyway they never no they
they said obviously it was obvious the
prize was going for this just obvious
yeah hey Star Talk fans I don't know if
you know this but the audio version of
the podcast actually posts a week in
advance of the video version and you can
get that in Spotify and apple podcast
and most other podcast Outlets that are
out there multiple ways to ingest all
that is Cosmic on Star Talk you can't be
a gent relativity Einstein guy without
being a black hole
guy so uh forgive me for asking you to
retell a story you've probably told a
thousand times but there's some famous
bet you made was it with presal with
some other physicist pral and and
Hawking and Steph Hawking uh by the way
I was was at the University of Texas
when presc was there I think he was like
a postto or some he was some it was just
starting out that's how old I am I'm an
old guy I'm an old guy you're you're a
young kid I'm an old man uh so uh you
made a bet and let me see if I can set
the table here a black hole once we all
agree that they exist we can ask other
questions when you have something
outside the black hole and it falls in
what happens to that information that
was contained in that object
is it gone forever and is that okay uh
because information theory was a whole
branch of science shall I call it
science that was rising up at around the
same time and and
entropy um became a a buzzword among
many so what was the BET and how did it
and how was it ultimately
resolved the BET was between Stephen
Hawking and me on one side John presal
on the other side it was over whether or
not information does get lost in black
holes the background of and why is that
so bad okay so it's it's it's bad
because uh the fundamental laws of
quantum mechanics as they are normally
formulated physicists are widely agreed
that quantum physics is
fundamental uh and that quantum physics
underlies all of physics it's the most
successful Theory ever put forth right
and of the universe and classical
physics where there are not these
Quantum fluctuations there are not these
probabilities that arises from quantum
physics as an approximation under
ordinary everyday circumstances there
are many people who caricature science
physics in particular by saying well we
used to think classical physics was it
but now we discard it in
of quantum physics but that's not true
no quantum physics absorbed yeah as well
as relativity general relativity
absorbing Newtonian gravity yeah it
doesn't it's not discarded it's a bigger
understanding a deeper understanding
okay just want to emphasize that many
people get that confused and so quantum
physics is normally
formulated is UN is almost universally
uh viewed
has built right into it from the very
beginning a the fact that information
cannot be
lost now these words information cannot
be lost are a translation into everyday
language of something else which is not
everyday language which says that uh the
evolution of everything in the universe
is
unitary and so those those are buzzwords
that are not part of the normal lexicon
but I want to to say just to say that be
indicate that there's some very very
extremely precise version of this of
which information is being lost is a
colloquial way of saying it okay okay
but it represent a violation of some
fundamental tenets of quantum theory
that's right Stephen Hawking back when
he was visiting Caltech who by the way
we've interviewed for Star Talk in our
iives check it out in
7475 he spent a year in my research
group at Caltech we were very close
friends and uh he during that period he
having discovered something called
Hawking radiation which uh is a a very
slow evaporation of a black hole it
emits radiation slowly
evaporates uh he then while he was here
uh began to look much more deeply at
quantum theory in black holes and he
came up with a prediction that
information really is lost and when
black holes evaporate you could form a
black hole uh it if you waited long
enough much longer than the age of the
universe for normal black holes uh the
black hole would evaporate and all the
information that went into the black
hole would be gone the black hole would
be gone you just simply lost the
information that no longer longer is
there and that was complete violation of
the normal tenants of quantum mechanics
and yet he was claiming that was true he
he wrote a paper on this with all the
technical details he couldn't get it
published because it was it was so
obvious it had to be wrong but nobody
could see anything wrong in his
calculation and so he had to fight for
more than a year to get it published if
you look at this P public paper you see
the submission date as all research
papers give you yes they give you a
submission date and then you usually
have a revised date and then it's
published there's no revised date
there's a submission date and the
publication date is something like
nearly a year and a half later he fought
for for a whole year more than a year to
get this thing published and physicists
struggled with this ever
since uh so uh those of us whose root
are in
relativity tended to believe Hawking and
those of us whose Roots were in who grew
up with quantum mechanics instead of
Relativity first those of us who were
enamored of Relativity tended to believe
Hawk and so Hawking and I made this bet
with presal whose Roots were in uh
in in quantum physics and he's the
junior of you both right young
whippersnapper coming up he is he is now
the Richard P fer professor profor of
thetical physics at calch I'm the
Richard P fan physic professor of thecal
physics Emeritus Emeritus okay I'm young
whipper snappers oh man they'll take
your job in a minute so I just turned
the chair over to to
Johan I mean John is brilliant he's a
hell of a lot smarter than I am hell of
a lot smarter anyway so so we made this
bet and
uh this was in a period when Hawking was
starting to visit Caltech for
Ally 3 to six weeks every year was he
yet wheelchair bound oh yeah he'd been
wheel he was wheelchair bound uh going
way back to about 1970 okay and uh this
is 1990 oh W much later okay we made the
BET around 1990 so the stage is set okay
the cage match is set you and Stephen
Hawking Titans in your field in your
subject
conclude yeah information is
lost especially if Hawking radiation you
can evaporate the black hole and
everything is gone there's no there's no
memory of what was there ccll is
declaring that information is not lost
and his roots are deep in quantum
physics which we know has never been
shown to be wrong and they're both
smarter than I am and they both know a
lot more about quantum physics than I do
because we'll return to this but let me
just explain
that through my whole career I've
thought that the quantum gravity come
combining general relativity with
quantum physics was the most important
area of physics of all but I also made a
decision when I was very young I will
never work in quantum gravity because
the field is too crowded there too many
smart people there I I will I will
pick I'm smart enough to pick really
important problems that I can solve uh
that nobody else is working on and and
they'll only they'll only figure out
later that I'm right that that those
problems are important but I won't touch
a problem a problem wherever we got a
million people in the room there too too
many smart too many smart people in the
room so anyway so so they they have now
agreed that information is not lost so
Hawking conceited and and by association
with you or or have you still a hold out
on this no I'm still a hold out okay and
then and and and what led to this
concession if I understand correctly so
he Stephen together with a St
was working on a a idea for how the
information might be uh
recovered and he
basically said
that in quantum physics if you form a
black hole and then it evaporates
there's also it's a tiny probability
that the black hole never formed in the
first place and the information sneaks
out through the root where it didn't
form in the first place
and uh and I'm sorry that sounds like a
cop out yeah well it does sound like a
cop out but it's it's very it's very
clever and it's in keeping with how
physics works but it's not obvious that
it's right but it's it's conceivable
this is this is this is what about the
idea so maybe I've misunderstood so I
got to go back to see where I've said
this even publicly I thought as the
black black hole evaporates cuz the
energy the gravitational energy in the
vicinity of a black hole and
spontaneously make a pair of particles
and one particle escapes the other one
falls into the black hole and this just
keeps going until there's no black hole
left but the particle that escapes if
you inventory those particles they're
real particles and don't you recover all
the particles that went in in the first
place oh you recover all the energy but
they don't but not the inventory of
particles the don't get the same
particles necessarily how okay then I
misunderstood that I I've been wrong I
think I've been wrong I thought you get
particle for particle they come out
which blew my mind uh I don't think
there certainly there's no proof that
that's the case well of course we we
certainly no proof that the case I don't
and I don't and I don't think it is the
case okay okay but okay so so you guys
lost the
bat well no I okay Hawking concedes the
bat Hawking concedes the bat and what
was that stake for this the loser will
give the winner an encyclopedia filled
with information
that
that somehow escaped the black hole and
so and so so information is the penalty
gift that's right so they Stephen
Hawking conceded the V at an big
International Conference on general
relativity and gravitation in Dublin
Ireland uh and early 2000 were there
gasps in the audience there R were
rumors that he was going to concede and
so there was a big ceremony that uh I
played some role in the ceremony but I
didn't concede myself uh and uh and so
Stephen gave presc was a big baseball
fan Encyclopedia of American baseball oh
any kind of Encyclopedia okay well that
was his idea that's that's clever so
anyway so and less expensive yeah I
didn't concede for a peculiar reason
that uh there is an alternative
formulation of Quant mechanics in which
uh information could be lost it's due to
Fineman called a sum over histories
formulation and uh I as I say I don't
work in quantum theory in any deep sort
of way I do in terms of quantum
technology which I we needed for ligo
but that's a separate story but uh two
of the very deepest physicists in uh in
uh working in quantum theory of of my
lifetime uh were Murray
galman and Jim hardle Jim harle at Santa
Barbara gmon at calch and then he moved
to the Santa Fe Institute to and
retirement gilm man is credited with
proposing quarks as the fundamental
article of science of thecal physics
when I was a young physicist ptech were
galmon and feineman
and two colleagues of mine that I
enormously respect uh so Gman and
hardle took
fineman's path enderal or some of
History's approach to quantum mechanics
and they developed it further and a form
that they could apply it to cosmology to
the
universe and uh then
uh they hard has used that to study
Quantum cosmology the quantum mechanical
description of how the birth of the
universe and how it has evolved that
particular approach to Quantum Mechanics
hardle took it and he showed how uh that
approach can deal perfectly well with
information
loss and uh and it deals with it it
arises because of what we call closed
timel curves there's a certain
probability for backward time travel in
Quantum in quantum physics and in in
this the in this Fineman galman hardle
approach uh there's a certain
probability for backward time travel and
if you can have backward time travel uh
at the quantum level then you lose
information and there's so there elegant
mathematical uh formulation Quant
physics is so weasly this way well
that's that that's not the standard
version of quantum mechanics but that
was the version that that that fan and
that hardland Gman needed in order to do
the quantum mechanics of the entire
universe and the birth of the universe
so we're getting into this issue of the
birth of the universe and and and
Quantum quantum gravity here and and and
I am rather enamored
of this approach although I don't do it
I just look on the sidelines and admire
the these people who are smarter than I
am and who have the courage to work in a
crowded
field but but I'm just so impressed with
this uh and with the fact that within
that formulation you can lose
information is that the start of a
formulation that will one day marry
general relativity in quantum physics
well it it it does do that it's it's not
it's not I it's knocking on the door
it's knocking on the door it's it's it's
it's it's and so so remind me now your
professor thorn in this question what is
the problem with G relativity not
melding together with quantum physics
what is the what is the real holdup
there well the real holdup is that they
are logically incompatible with each
other and so something has to give and
that's because of the qu general
relativity requires space to be a
continuous you have a Continuum space
you and and it's a very definite space
it's not a space where you have a
certain probability that space is Warped
in this way and another probability is
Warped in that that way in fact there no
probabilities at all yeah there are
classical probabilities but not Quantum
not Quantum probabilities and so at the
at the smallest scale they're
incompatible the smallest scale they're
incompatible in in any place where
gravity becomes extremely strong they're
incompatible so the the smallest scale
they're incompatible uh even here in
this room but also they're incompatible
they're incompatible in the birth of the
universe When Gravity was extremely
strong they're incompatible in the cord
of a black hole where gravity is
extremely strong they're incompatible uh
if you try to make a time machine hockey
and I independently with our students
s of identified a process whereby if a
very Advanced civilization tries to make
a time machine it will quite possibly
explode at the moment you try to turn it
on uh and that's also controlled by uh
these laws of quantum gravity so that's
why we haven't seen any time travelers
yet oh that's that's that may be the
explain Dead trying to turn on the
machine that's right what you're saying
is Einstein puts forth the general
theory of relativity
which is so successful in so many Realms
and it picked up where Newtonian gravity
failed yet we must confess or concede
that there's a limit to how far general
relativity goes although we've yet to
find a limit to quantum physics so the
betting the betting pool will say
general relativity is going to succumb
to quantum physics in some way yeah that
that's one way to say it they certainly
there is the incompatibility between the
two and strength theorists are trying to
be this they're like performing the
shotgun wedding between the two branches
of physics somehow yeah and I I do think
again looking in from the outside since
I've chosen not to work in this field
that string theory is uh is likely to be
a successful route into the correct loss
of they've been add it for 50 years0 40
years very long come on I I'm 84 years
old come on that's that's that's just a
drop in the bucket come on wait but
Einstein went from special relativity to
general relativity in 10 years Kepler
went from from weird nested solids to
the Kepler's Three Laws of Motion in 10
years and that's lone scientists we've
been working to try to do controlled
Fusion
for longer than more than 50 years ligo
took 50 years from the time I first
started working on gravitational waves
until we succeeded it was 50 years some
things take a long time yeah but ligo is
a machine the the merging of quantum
physics and general relativity are ideas
could it be and I've said this I I I I
don't want to say this to you because
you're you're Kip Thorn but but I've
said this to Brian Green okay because
Brian Green's like my generation I said
to Brian Green I said Brian you've been
working on strength theory for decades
uh maybe all of you are just too stupid
to figure it out and we're waiting for
someone else to be born into this field
to then solve it in the ways none of the
rest of you can none of them are saying
I'm too stupid to figure this out let me
choose another profession no they're
saying the problem is too hard and if
you go 40 Years of really smart people
not figuring something out that tells me
either they're barking up the wrong tree
or none of them are smart
enough am I am I overreacting I I I
think you have to remember that we do
build on each other none of them by
themselves are smart enough okay but the
the community again it's it's like this
Nobel Prize really belongs to a thousand
people doesn't belong to me uh it with a
Genesis in and in Joe Weber a Genesis
and Joe Weber we build NE Newton spoke
of standing on the shoulders of giants
and that really is true the
if I can see farther than others it's
because I've stood on the shoulders of
giants who' have come before me and
that's the nature of science and the uh
struggles that our colleagues have been
having with string theory and M Theory
and quantum
gravity we learned an an enormous amount
uh it shows it's very promising uh but
it's going to continue on into the Next
Generation before the ultimate successes
had a very very very
probably those are like final words
right there those
are K I've heard
rumor that whichever faculty of Caltech
gets a Nobel Prize they get a parking
spot with their name on it is that true
if I went at calch a Nobel Prize does
not get you a parking spot with your
name on it you have you you have to pay
for this parking spot just as much as
you do without a Nobel Prize okay that
was such a fun rumor though I heard that
that that's true at USC but it's not
true at Caltech okay because there's
just too many of you all running around
with Nobel prizes then the parking spots
are too
valuable so chew it USC okay just chew
it USC all right so you're 84 you have
84 years of
wisdom hsing in your veins and arteries
are there any projects you're working on
in the next several years no I I made a
gradual transition conscious uh away
from science away from scientific
research uh beginning uh around 15 years
ago
oh I you know I would like to be like to
believe I can live to 110 that's my uh
intended goal uh and so for the uh next
uh uh remaining decades I wanted to do
things that I really enjoyed and I have
enjoyed science I've been a conventional
Caltech Professor for half a century uh
enormously enjoyed it enormously enjoyed
working with students I trained a over
50 PhD students and who did far more
important research than I did uh and uh
been there done that uh and I I have
worked in all these areas of Science and
I've had enormous fun but I've turned
them over to the younger generation and
uh they're smarter than I am okay so
what are you you you surfing now or or
skydiving what okay you taking up other
so so I I decided that I would like to
spend a few decades uh doing creative
work at the interface between science
and the Arts oh so Interstellar is an
example that was going to be released in
September and then they delayed it to
the holiday season in December so the
re-release of re-release to December
2024 that's right that's right that that
was enormously enjoyable I it I from me
I learned how great it can be to
collaborate with somebody is brilliant
and is completely different than I am
Christopher
Nolan so my most recent collaboration
has been a book of poetry and paintings
with Leah howerin
uh and uh about the Warped side of the
universe and uh my poetry my attempts at
poetry and her paintings but just trying
to see whether it's possible by tightly
integrating paintings with a verse to
convey the essence of issues in science
the spirit the ENT essential features
without conveying the precise
details no that's not the right genre
for precise details but the
anyway so I've been enjoying that by the
way I've always felt that way about
bango's Starry Night yes where you look
at that painting you say this is clearly
not what he saw but it's definitely what
he felt yes yes and you get to
experience the universe through his own
lens yes and so I've always appreciated
art when it plays that role yeah I have
a second movie that's been in the works
for more than a decade can you tell can
you well it's just something that I
started with stepen Hawk and Linda opst
who is my my partner on uh starting
Interstellar uh and is wonderful to work
with uh but that movie might might never
get made I'm not going to tell you what
it's about aside from the fact that it's
sci-fi and it's solid sci-fi as high
it's buil in from the outset so if that
does not work out in the end uh then I
may turn it into try turning it into a
novel I've never tried to write a novel
I whether I can but it would be fun to
try and actually the thing that I have
put almost a large fraction of my effort
in the Lion Share of my effort in since
the beginning of the pandemic is a
history of the ligo project the ligo
gravitational wave project because that
is I think pretty clearly the
technically most difficult uh thing
that's ever been done by physicist by
anybody uh by anybody yeah probably by
anybody and 11 100th the diameter of
proton that's anybody and and uh
success required both uh amazing
developing amazing technology new
technologies
it required
developing uh computer simulations of
colliding black holes required
developing Quantum Precision measurement
technology that is now in ligo and is
playing a major role where you
circumvent the What's called the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle my mind
is still partly blown by having by you
having said that you're bypassing
Heisenberg's uncertainty princi that's
right you by manipulating vacuum
fluctuations just like Advanced
civilizations might do as a routine
thing yeah so we had to we developed
this new area of technology for Lio uh
the and but it was also a very political
thing how do you get a billion dollars
of taxpayer money uh for a field that
doesn't didn't exist when you began and
should they bet on you and not someone
else right and plus I think you even had
naysayers if I remember correctly
colleagues would say this is a this is a
pipe we we had we had political battles
in Washington yeah tell me who the Nays
saers were I got people take care of
they were some of the leading
astronomers in I got people take you
want my people to
no they they've come around you think
okay they've come around because this
this is so exciting now now that Lego
succeeded but but the sociology of the
transition from small science to big
science is a very Rocky process and
that's the right word sociology because
that's what it is I I don't like working
in a big Pro big science project it's
not for me just like working in a
crowded field is not for me but we had
to tr we this had to make the it
wouldn't have happened transation
wouldn't have happened otherwise the
genius of Barry beish in in making that
happen was and the genius of Robie voked
and getting us partway there the very
beginning is our initial director who
was the one that sold it to Congress and
and uh and it really got us going it's
it's a very complicated story
and I
have a a set of five collaborators I've
been working on with this history we
just finished draft six and sent it out
to Liu colleagues to comment on and I
have getting back huge numbers of
comments and it'll take me two more
years I think to so anyway the this this
history because of the nature of this
project it's a very interesting and
complex history that is quite important
for the F for the history of science ESP
when you consider most people knew
nothing of Lio until they see the
headline that it discovered
gravitational
and why would they have any thought of
what challenges preceded that you know
they just read the result oh scientists
discover this well how about the the the
like you said the politics the sociology
the the Genesis the who's standing on
Whose shoulders who the naysayers all
that has to be overcome the
international collaboration key input
from the Soviet Union in the depths of
the Cold
War and I me it's it's just a
fascinating story
and enormous
fun you know Arthur C Clark said he said
um in space where there is no air a flag
will not wave so maybe the universe is
not a place where we should be waving
flags collaboration is what gets you
there I like that so Kip this has been a
delight thanks for making time a lot of
fun first star talk
I look forward to uh the release of the
re-release of interstellar uh we're
recording this before that has come out
and uh you already know this but let me
reaffirm that that film just took people
on a ride uh far beyond anything they
had imagined they had kind of an impact
on people in the way 2001 Space Odyssey
did it was it was mysterious it was
Modern it was the future but was still
relevant but it left you with more
questions to ask than questions answered
and and that you want that I think yeah
and and that was really The Genius of
Christopher
Nolan uh taking some science that he and
I had put together together but
combining with a human story that it was
powerful uh and uh and with Marquee
director and Marquee actors that made
sure would get noticed music yes uh I
went to a concert by hun Zimmer
who just I think the night before last
and uh he let loose what I didn't know
there that he basically said that the
mus certain pieces of the music in
interstellar are as close to Perfection
as he has achieved wow I'm going to give
it another listen because there is no
2001 without its musical track with the
Strauss Wales the the
this is very different it's all
all Zimmer's original music and it's a a
remarkable score uh just amazing i' look
forward to your next 25 years when you
live
to0 uh maybe we can do a reprise of this
conversation we'll check in on you see
how you've been coming along dude okay
thanks a lot thanks great to see you
again thanks this has been a special
conversation exclusive one-on one
between Star Talk and hip Thorn Nobel
laurate even let me touch his
metal first time I've ever touched the
Nobel Prize well the medal that really
belongs to a thousand the medal earned
by a huge team as he uh humbly declares
and as we enter a new era of science
where collaborations are really how this
works especially where you have
international collaborations you have
scientists getting along even at times
when the leaders of their countries are
in Conflict that's just messed up that's
that's messed up I'm Neil degrass Tyson
your personal astrophysicist for Star
talk as always I bid you to keep looking
up
[Music]